>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Minimal APIs,
that is the paradigm that we started with
and I think that this is the one
that Microsoft really has
at the beginning of projects, because it's
very similar to frameworks like Express.
It's no secret that Microsoft wants
to attract more .NET developers,
and frankly, I'm with them.
I wanna see the ecosystem grow and
be prosperous for developers all over
to see how awesome it is and
feel how awesome it is the same way I do.
So a lot of the examples that they have
are using their minimal APIs, which
is just like, define a weather forecast,
right, show you an example of that, and
then let you edit that, let you mess
around with that, and then get started.
However, for most of the production
code that I see out in the wild,
they don't use minimal APIs.
They use something called controllers.
So I wanna talk about those, and
then what we're gonna do is we are gonna
refactor our application to convert
it from minimal APIs to controllers.
We're gonna walk through
every aspect of that.
We're gonna see the good stuff,
the bad stuff, and everything in-between.
So let's talk about it.
First let's talk about
kinda the minimal API.
So it's kind of there in the name, but
they do have some limitations
compared to controllers.
For 90% of use cases,
I think they're fine.
But they do tend to be less flexible
than their controller counterparts.
Controllers just have more support
because they've been around a lot longer.
They've been around since
the .NET Framework days.
As the project grows in size, minimal APIs
tend to feel a lot more boilerplatey and
harder to organize.
Controllers are a natural
organization unit for
APIs, which we'll see as we get to them.
And maybe most importantly, in the wild,
minimal APIs are simply less ubiquitous,
they're less common than controllers,
which have been around for a lot longer.
And finally, in my opinion, dependency
management for services that you use,
that your API might use,
is simply just cleaner on controllers.
And here's kind of a really exaggerated
example of a minimal API that has just way
too many services.
And yes,
I do define APIs that are fairly complex.
Again, APIs can and
do model real business workflows.
And real business workflows aren't
necessarily super straightforward,
sometimes they're a little messy.
If you define a minimal API that
requires that you use a lot of services,
perhaps this is your incoming request,
this is your body of your request, but
then you need to have
access to the database.
We also need the HttpContext, because we
need to read certain headers from that,
and, IEmailService, we need to be able
to send emails and text messages and
then process payments on this endpoint.
Then we've got our IWhateverService,
or IsThisEnoughServicesService?
So minimal APIs can get
a little long in the tooth
when you're talking about
dependency management.
I think that minimal APIs are a great
way to get started in ASP.NET.
But I vastly prefer controllers.
My rule of thumb is around ten, and
if I think that the project has even
a chance of being remotely complex or
growing beyond ten endpoints,
I'm gonna just throw away minimal APIs and
start with controllers in general.
And I got to emphasize that 99% of ASP.NET
Core development that I've been exposed to
has all used controllers.
So minimal APIs have their place for
really small services, microservices, or
maybe you're adding them to an existing
project that doesn't have HTTP.
Maybe it's some kind of service that you
wanna be able to add a health endpoint to.
Minimal APIs would be a great use case for
that if you're just
defining a couple of APIs.
But beyond that,
it's all controllers for me.
So a controller starts off as a class and
it inherits from Controller,
as you can imagine.
You could also inherit from
something called ControllerBase,
which we can look at the source code for
both.
But Controller gives you
lots of extra goodies, so
I always inherit from Controller.
And here's what it looks like.
So let's break this
down just a little bit.
First of all, we have our ApiController.
Because we're, of course, focused on
building ASP.NET Core API specifically,
the ApiController attribute just
gives it a few extra behaviors,
which you can see here.
So first things first, all endpoints
must use attribute-based routing.
So it says that HttpGet, HttpPost,
all of those are required, which are good.
That's how you define routes, and
that's how we wanna define routes.
Returns a ProblemDetails object for
all 400 or 500 responses, which is good.
It automatically returns
ValidationProblemDetails for
400 bad request responses.
It also automatically validates incoming
objects, but it doesn't apply in our case
because we're using fluid validation,
which we will get to.
We'll get to that a little later.
And then it does some basic inference on
parameters to your controller methods,
which means that you don't have
to use these attributes as much.
I choose to in most of my production
projects, use them anyways.
And to be honest with you, I'm not exactly
sure how this inference magic works under
the hood, so I just bypass all that.
I get rid of the magic, and then in
production APIs, I typically just use
FromQuery, FromRoute, FromBody to be real
explicit about the method parameters.
So you'll notice this kind of funny thing.
You can think of this as kind of
a route group, kind of, a little bit,
in that you can define a base route for
all of the methods on your controller.
In this case, you see that there's
a [controller], and that's basically
an ASP.NET built-in placeholder to say,
hey, we're just gonna take the name of
the class that you've defined your
controller in, so in this case,
it's Customers, and that's what we're
gonna put at the beginning of our route.
So this CustomersController would
be /customers, pretty easy.
We then have our HttpGet.
So this would be akin to our
MapGet method on a minimal API.
So we simply say that we define a method,
and like our minimal API method,
it can have parameters to
take in route parameters or
the body of the request or
even services if you like.
And you can say HttpGet.
That's how you mark it as a get request.
That's equivalent to the MapGet, but
instead you're using an attribute.
We return IActionResult,
which we'll get to a little later.
That's basically kind
of our results class.
And then we just name our method, and
typically, the name of the method isn't
really used by ASP.NET Core
unless you explicitly tell it to.
You can tell it, hey,
use the name of the method for this, but
I typically choose not to.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Our HttpGet
endpoint to get a single customer is
very similar to the MapGet single employee
endpoint that we had previously defined.
And you notice that
HttpGet has an argument.
We can define the route in this argument.
So it could be, we could say
customers/single/id if we choose.
Most RESTful API design would just
simply say use the plural word,
followed by slash, followed by the id.
That's pretty typical.
So that's defining this route
to the GetCustomerId, and
it builds upon the route that's
defined up here in our controller.
So this would be /customers/ and
then the id of your customer.
So syntactically, and kind of in terms of
what it looks like when the rubber meets
the road, they're very similar to minimal
APIs, but again, way more common.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: You could
read all about breakdown in this part.
Just a couple of callouts is that
all of my APIs, without exception,
return IActionResult.
That is always the case.
As I mentioned, same with minimal APIs,
I don't return the objects directly.
I prefer to treat them as HTTP APIs and
return it in explicit
status code every time